'The Cancer Genome Atlas'(TCGA) is a research consortium set up to curate
clinical data from thousands of patient participants, covering an array of
cancer types.   Provided data includes basic clinical information as well as DNA
and RNA sequencing of cancer biopsies. These data sets are updated frequently as
new information becomes available.  Thus each data download represents a
snapshot in an evolving data set.

While detailed genomic and RNA sequence data is control-accessed, pre-processed
gene count data is publicly available.  Data can be downloaded via the
consortium  portal or acquired into dataframe format using a package in the R
language.  If the script, 'Dataset_setup/tcga_dataset_setup.R' is run in R, then
two feather files (which can be read by many languages, including python) will
be stored in the working directory for the clinical, and gene count datasets,
respectively.  The versions stored in the submission repository are current at
the time of submission.

The clinical data set contains 22 features, of which several are irrelevant
(e.g. all prostate cancer patients are 'male').  Features with a single
categorical class were removed in the 'Dataset_cleanup/cleanup_clinical.py'
script.  Then, in order to mimic the knowledge state a doctor/patient would
encounter upon presentation, features were limited to only those that would be
known prior to Gleason score analysis.  This includes the age of the patient,
and the patient's PSA (prostate secreted antigen) test score.  The outcome
variable for this project is contained in the clinical data set, which is
'pathologyNstage'.  This label is composed of 'n0' or 'n1', representing local
versus metastatic cancer, respectively.  Unfortunately of the 499 patients
enrolled in the study, 73 records did not include the metastasis state and were
excluded.

The primary data set for this project is the gene count matrix.  This data set
provides a value for gene expression level for every known human gene.  The same
patient index links the clinical data set to the  gene count data set, of which
497 are common among the two.  As the expression values for each patient are not
normalized, an important step prior to analysis was to transform each value to
the transcript count per million reads (TPM).  This transformation normalizes
such that the expression levels for each patient are now comparable.  A test was
run after transformation to ensure that each patient profile totalled 1 million
reads.  The next section will serve to describe the clinical data and provide a
benchmark prognosis rate using information available to a doctor at
presentation.   
