The prostate is a glandular organ of the male reproductive system that helps to
control urinary and reproductive functions.  According to the charity Prostate
Cancer UK, one in eight British men will  be diagnosed with prostate
adenocarcinoma (prostate cancer, henceforth 'PC') in their  lifetime {citation}.
Men over 50 years of age are often subjected to routine digital examinations, or
urine test (the 'PCA' test) for signs of PC.  However the gold standard
diagnosis is the Gleason test.  In brief, a series of small needle sized
biopsies are taken from the patient's prostate gland.  Each biopsy is processed
and scored by a pathologist for signs of abnormal cell type and
structure.  Gleason scores ranging from 2 to 5 are considered not
malignant, whereas scores ranging from 6-10 are considered malignant and provide
an added estimation of severity (Humphrey, 2004).

Contrary to some types of cancer, malignancies that remain local within the
prostate are rarely lethal (survival rating of ~99%) {citation}.  However, if a
malignancy born of the prostate undergoes metastasis (the process of cancer cell
migration to other sites in the body), the survival rate drops to ~28%.  Because
of this discrepancy, many men opt for radical prostatectomy (surgical removal of the
entire prostate).  While ensuring prevention of metastasis, removal of the
prostate results in high morbidity, e.g. inability to control urination, loss of
sexual function, etc.

Unfortunately, there are currently no prognostic tests for PC metastasis.  The
patient data  that is typically available at the time of diagnosis is not rich
enough to accurately predict the likelihood of prostate cancer metastasis
{citation}.   A model that is able to predict whether an untreated malignancy
would be likely to remain locally within the prostate or to metastasize could be
an invaluable tool on whether prostatectomy (and the associated morbidity) is
necessary.

One potential solution to this problem is the burgeoning emphasis on
'Personalized Medicine'. In its current context, so-called 'Personalized
Medicine' refers to use of an individual's  genomic information to inform future
medical decisions.  For example, presence of  mutations in the BRCA1 (sometimes
ignominiously referred to as the 'Angelina Jolie gene'),  leads some women to
undergo a prophylatic mastectomy in the absence of any signs of cancer.  However,
sequencing of a human genome is a monumental undertaking, even considering the great
strides made in Next Generation Sequencing technology.  A related, but perhaps,
less resource intensive, technique is RNA-seq.  Genomic DNA sequencing provides
information on the entire genome of an individual, irrespective of the fact that most
genes will not be active in a given tissue versus another tissue.  Sequencing RNA
which is the first step of gene expression / activation, can provide a quantitative
analysis of which genes are active in a specific sample.  As an example, one could
compare the RNA-seq profiles of a tumor and a benign sample from the same person to
learn which genes are activated / de-activated in the specific tumor.  This could allow
a more targeted therapy for the patient.

In the context of prostate cancer, given the assumption that metastatic cancer cells
(i.e. cells that migrate) will have different gene activation profiles than stationary
cancer cells, I hypothesized that RNA-seq profiles could be used to predict whether a
Prostate tumor would metastasize or not.  
